---
layout: post
title: A New Pulse for SLEEF
author: Pierre Blanchard
author_url: https://github.com/blapie
---

The SLEEF project provides open-source vectorized elementary math routines
across widely used computer architectures and associated vector extensions. Its
latest release came out this month along with updated documentation and
contribution guidelines. This post inaugurates a new blog section on the
project's website.

## Towards Fairer Contributions to SLEEF

At the end of 2023, after a long period of uncertainty for SLEEF, as discussed
on [#442](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/issues/442), the SLEEF project has
been revitalized with many contributions being accepted and three releases
made. Like many open-source projects, SLEEF relies on the contributions of the
community and the availability of maintainers. Without support (be it financial
or in kind) from the main actors that benefit from these projects, there is a
high chance for such projects to fall dormant again in the future.

Nearly a year ago Shibata-san, the project owner, came to an agreement with
Arm&reg;, and temporarily handed over the global maintainer role to a team of
software engineers at Arm, see discussion
[#472](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/discussions/472). After identifying
critical pending issues and pull-requests (PRs), in what came to be a long
backlog overhaul, the newly accredited maintainers focused on revamping
Continuous Integration (CI) and triaging issues and PRs. The team received
outstanding contributions from the community for extending support to new
architectures ([#477](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/pull/477)), improving
the build system ([#531](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/pull/531)) and CI
testing ([#476](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/pull/476)), as well as
supporting on macOS and Windows, see PRs
[#540](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/pull/540) and
[#543](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/pull/543). A first release in almost 3
years came out of this joint effort, namely [SLEEF
3.6](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/releases/tag/3.6), followed by a
substantial patch release, [SLEEF
3.6.1](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/releases/tag/3.6.1).

<p style="text-align:center;">
  <a class="nothing" href="https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/graphs/contributors">
    <img src="../../../img/insights.png" alt="Insights"/>
  </a>
  <br/>
  Contributions/Commits over time, as shown on the GitHub Insights.
</p>

## A Community-Driven Revival

Community contributions have been central to the recent revival of SLEEF. As
maintainers, our task was to motivate and facilitate direct contributions from
the community and make sure they serve the communityâ€™s broader interests.

To keep maintenance as low-cost and future proof as possible, it was agreed to
rely on GitHub's functionalities, such as [GitHub Actions for CI
testing](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/actions). With help from the
community, we are now nearly matching the level of testing prior to 2020, while
supporting more widely used and reproducible build environments as provided by
GitHub-hosted runners.

We are grateful for the contributions from communities based around the many
architectures SLEEF now supports, including IBM&reg; S/390 and PowerPC, Intel&reg; x86,
RISC-V, and Arm architectures.

<p style="text-align:center;">
  <a class="nothing" href="../../../img/matrix.png">
    <img src="../../../img/matrix.png" alt="Matrix"/>
  </a>
  <br/>
  Sample of the table/matrix of supported environment, reporting the status of
  GHA-based post-commit pipeline on multiple OS-es, and support level for
  individual vector extensions.
</p>

## A New Regular Release Schedule

The growing engagement on the repository is a good indicator of the
community's attachment to the project and its appetite for the SLEEF project
maintenance and development. By demand of many users, SLEEF is now on a regular
release schedule (a minor release every 6 months), which is particularly
helpful to large open-source projects that rely on SLEEF such as PyTorch, e.g.
[#131642](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/pull/131642) and
[#134672](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/pull/134672),  Spack, e.g.
[#45431](https://github.com/spack/spack/pull/45431), or Linux distributions
like Ubuntu and Fedora.

The [latest release of
SLEEF](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/releases/tag/3.7) paves the way to a
community-maintained open-source project by providing crucial [community
standards](https://github.com/shibatch/sleef/community) such as issues and PR
templates, as well as clear [Contribution
Guidelines](https://sleef.org/6-contribute/). On top of this, the latest
released version does facilitate maintenance of documentation by making it more
accessible and easier to contribute to (via markdown), not to mention improved
navigation and rendering on both GitHub UI and [sleef.org](https://sleef.org/).

## What to Expect Next?

To stay on top of new compilers and OS-es, a lot of the maintainers time is
spent on testing infrastructure and bug fixes. This increasing demand means
increasing firefighting pressure, which could mean less time available for
developing new features. However, keeping the community's engagement high is
key to a healthy open-source project. We also believe that investing in
efficient maintenance will make new feature integration more seamless in the
future.

Benchmarking and testing engines are currently being reworked with maintenance
cost and portability in mind. We expect to make more machines and platforms
available in CI via self-hosted runners, and we plan to add further security
checks in CI. By popular demand, CPU detection is another aspect that we are
looking to spend time on soon.

As always SLEEF is open to contributions, so please visit our [Contribution
Guidelines](https://sleef.org/6-contribute/) to find ways to contribute. If you
would like to request a feature or fix a bug, the community can assist you in
achieving this.

## Acknowledgment

We would like to thank the community for its continuous support in delivering a
high-quality open-source project that works across platforms, their precious
feedback and contributions have been central to the recent revival of the
project and will be as essential for the future of SLEEF.
